$TAB: (8)

  Introduction
  Character Table
  Some notes
  History
  Future


Introduction:

The KApIqaD typeface is a font for writing klingon with the alphabet
adopted by Klingon Language Institute (and accepted as canon by most
other klingonists). The font contains the entire (Klingon) alphabet
(known as "pIqaD") with the following letters (in alphabetical
order).

             a, b, ch, D, e, gh, H, I, j, l, m, n, ng,
              o, p, q, Q, r, S, t, tlh, u, v, w, y, '

Also the numbers 0-9 have been included, as well as the much debated
and controversial punctuation marks that occurs on the SkyBox
Trading Cards. Finally, although technically not signs of writing,
the symbols of the Klingon Empire and Klingonska Akademien have been
included in this font.


Character Table:

  Alphabet:            Numerals:
   Key:    Glyph:       Key:    Glyph:
   a (A)   a            0 ())   0
   b (B)   b            1 (!)   1
   c (C)   ch           2 (@)   2
   d (D)   D            3 (#)   3
   e (E)   e            4 ($)   4
   f (F)   ng           5 (%)   5
   g (G)   gh           6 (^)   6
   h (H)   H            7 (&)   7
   i (I)   I            8 (*)   8
   j (J)   j            9 (()   9
   k (K)   q
   l (L)   l
   m (M)   m           Punctuation:
   n (N)   n            Key:    Glyph:
   o (O)   o            space   space
   p (P)   p            _ (n/a) non­breaking space
   q (Q)   q            , (n/a) ,;: (from SkyBox)
   r (R)   r            . (n/a) .?! (from SkyBox)
   s (S)   S
   t (T)   t
   u (U)   u           Other:
   v (V)   v            Key:    Glyph:
   w (W)   w            > (Z)   Klingon Empire (From StarTrekPi)
   x (X)   tlh          < (n/a) Klingonska Akademien
   y (Y)   y
   z (')   '

This table lists all glyphs and their mapping. Key given within
paranthesis is the corresponding mapping in the KLIpIqaDmey typeface
(note that KApIqaD and KLIpIqaDmey are not compatible).


Some notes:

This font is based on parts of the Klingon Language Institute's
typeface "KLIpIqaDmey". Some extra glyphs have been added, and all
glyphs have been been rearranged to be more easily accessible.

KLIpIqaDmey is a nice typeface with a few obvious disadvantages,
such as; the fact that the obsolete Mandel character set is the
easiest accessibe, while the "true" {pIqaD} have been stuffed in
there more as an extra than as the main character set.

The KLIpIqaDmey uses the special characters available on the shifted
number keys (exlcamation mark, at, number sign etc.) to achieve the
Klingon numerals. This is *not* a good idea, since it demands that
the U.S. Qwerty keyboard layout is used for the placement of the
numerals to be correct. On any other keyboard layout this becomes an
annoyance.

KLIpIqaDmey lacks the newer punctuation marks found in the SkyBox
Trading Cards.







There are some {pIqaD} fonts available from the Klingon Language
Institute,


Unlike KLI's "KLIpIqaDmey" this typeface only contains *one* Klingon
alphabet - pIqaD. (The old Mandel alphabet is not well suited for
Klingon anyway. [for details see HolQeD 1:1 p.18])

This font uses only lower case letters (so you will have to write
you I's and S's small too). Also all polygraphs have been changed,
which also is the case for {q} and the glottal stop. Some of them
are pretty straightforward (such as c={ch}, g={gh} and k={q} while
q={Q}) but some are not (f={ng} and x={tlh}).






The glottal stop has been placed on the "z" (instead of the expected
aphostrophe) simply to avoid the frustration that may occur due to
the fact that most modern word processors interfere with the useage
of apostrophes - replacing them with "typographically correct"
versions (thus effectively preventing one from writing this sign
correctly).

I've also added the two punctuation marks used on the SkyBox Trading
Cards, as has been suggested to me by Nick Nicholas, one of those
who helped restore the Hamlet to the original version.



Typing the "greater" and "less" signs causes the symbols for the
Klingon Empire and Klingonska Akademien to be used.


History:

  V0.5ß: [1999­10­27]
    o Made the kerning pairs beginning with Klingonska Akademien's
      symbol.

  V0.4ß: [1999­10­26]
    o Made the kerning pairs ending in Klingonska Akademien's
      symbol.
    o Created and added Klingonska Akademien's symbol.

  V0.3ß: [1999­10­24]
    o Made space somewhat larger.
    o Corrected the path directions.

  V0.2ß: [1999­10­24]
    o Made kerning data for comma and period.
    o General cleanup of (found) weird kerning pairs.
    o Made kerning data for the numbers glyphs (it was previously
      lacking).

  V0.1ß: [1999­10­22]
    o Made kerning data for the StarTrekPi's Klingon Empire symbol.
    o Copied Klingon Empire symbol from the StarTrekPi typeface
      (canon version).
    o Copied period and comma from an old version of this font.
    o Copied the kerning pairs from the original KLIpIqaDmey
      typeface.
    o Copied the glyphs (a-z [including glottal stop], 0-9 and
      Klingon Empire Symbol) from KLIpIqaDmey.


Future:
    o Write a proper documentation (this consists of pieces of older
      docs).


President of Klingonska Akademien
Björn X Öqvist
Uppsala, 1999­10­26


With special thanks Nick Nicholas, who originally brought the SkyBox
punctuation signs to my attention.













====================================================================
	Infofile to older version of the font:
====================================================================
This typeface is produced with my own purposes in mind. Basically it
is made for use in the printed version of "The Canon Klingon
Dictionary," a pocket sized Klingon-English/English dictionary
produced by The Klingon Academy, here in Sweden.

Basically the keyboard layout follows the guidelines for the Klingon
transliteration system given by Marc Okrand in "The Klingon
Dictionary". However there are some exceptions:

  o  Klingon {ch} is placed on the "c" key.
  o  Klingon {ng} is placed on the "f" key.
  o  Klingon {gh} is placed on the "g" key.
  o  Klingon {q} is placed on the "k" key.
  o  Klingon {tlh} is placed on the "x" key.
  o  Klingon {'} is placed on the "z" key.
  o  Klingon {.} is placed on the "!", "?" and "." keys.
  o  Klingon {,} is placed on the ":", ";" and "," keys.
  o  The Klingon Empire symbol is placed on the "@" key.
  o  Roman "-" is placed on the "-" key.
  o  Roman (lowered) "~" is placed on the "~" key.
  o  Roman "*" is placed on the "*" key.

The placement of {'} was changed in respect to KLI's font because
many programs substitute the quotes with "typographically correct"
such, thus not displaying the right glyph. Since I use a lot of
different computers and platforms (my own Amiga, friend's PCs and
Macintoshes and the University's Sun Stations) I prefer this
placement.

The Klingon half and full stop (comma and period) were both placed
on several punctuation mark keys. The Klingons themself most surely
do not distinguish the difference since it is pretty obvious in
languange syntax anyway.

The (Roman) symbols "-" (hypen) "~" (tilde) and "*" (asterisk) were
included for useage in "The Canon Klingon Dictionary". Hypen is
there used to denote an affix (whether prefix or suffix is
determined by placement before or after). Tilde indicate the current
word, and the asterisk preceedes gramatically incorrect or
non­existant example words and phrases.

Also note that the spacing between characters may be somewhat "off,"
this sould not occur if you write in real Klingon since all kerning
pairs (which determine the distance between glyphs) that can occur
in Klingon has been accordingly adjusted. If you for some reason
write several vowels or consonants in a row (something that does not
occur naturaly in Klingon) you may experiance this, however.

This typeface is actually a modification of Klingon Language
Institute's "KLIpIqaDmey." The original font by Ph.D. Lawrence M.
Schoen included both the Mandel set of characters and the KLI
endorsed {pIqaD} set. (Hence the plural form of the name.) I removed
this since it is not suitable for the {tlhIngan Hol}, and the
placement of the letters in the shifted position (A-Z rather than
a-z) were not suited for my purposes. The placement of the numbers
on the *shifted* number keys ("!@#$%^&*()") became *really* annoying
when using a Swedish keyboard layout where these characters are
somewhat rearranged.

   Zrajm C Akfohg          dark@bahnhof.se
   The Klingon Academy     www.come.to/ka
   Uppsala, Sweden


